Crypto Miner's Trust

One of my favorite use cases for what someone might call “smart law” is that of the trust. People are most familiar with trusts when it comes to estate planning. This is where we get the term “trust fund babies” or my favorite “trustafarians” (see stoners at expensive liberal arts colleges with dreadlocks and BMWs).  But, I digress.

A trust is when a legal relationship is created at the direction of of a person to another person, by placing their property, subject to certain duties or fiduciary requirements, to use and protect it for the benefit of others. What is crazy is that you can even transfer your own property (as you will learn sooner: cryptocurrency and mining equipment) to yourself as Trustee of the trust that only benefits you. This is called a grantor trust or an inter vivos trust which is typically used in estate planning.

So why trusts, why now? While we all sit around  and wait for Ethereum to reinvent legal relationships, there are plenty of opportunities to incorporate traditional legal practices into you activity in the cryptoeconomy.

I had to spend a little time digesting the IRS ruling that deemed Bitcoin and other coins as property. I didn’t really know what to do with it. I didn’t want to ponder the implication of reporting capital gains or losses on a cup of coffee.  I wanted to solve the problem. Truthfully, I just pivoted. I started thinking about the tax implications of mining cryptocurrency. Since mining Bitcoin is dominated by large mining operations and I don’t write for them, I tried to focus on mining altcoins.

When you mine an altcoin, typically you are not able to convert it into U.S. dollars (or any other fiat currency), but you can sell on an exchange and receive BTC in return. According to the IRS, this is not a taxable event. This might make your tax planning a little easier. Rather than worry about when you discovered a block, you just have to keep track of your sale of coins (“dumps”) on Cryptsy or perhaps MintPal.

Now, back to the idea of a Miner’s trust. Presumably you can execute a document that says something to the effect of: “I, Altcoin Miner, Settlor, transfer ownership of all of my mining rigs, to be held in a Miner’s Trust, with Altcoin Miner, as Trustee.”  Suddenly, you are the beneficiary of the Trust and at the same time its steward (if you so choose). If I read the IRS ruling correctly,  you would likely, only be taxed on your income as its reported from your receipt of BTC distributions from the Trust. Thus, the taxable event. Of course you would have to keep track of the values of Bitcoin at the time your trust converted into fiat, or if the distribution was in BTC at the time or your sale.

So why do I need a trust when I would be doing the same thing for tax purposes that I would do without it? First, a trust has a long history of allowing for a certain modicum of privacy. The IRS has a long history of treating grantor trusts and their trustees as one in the same, but outside the realm of tax evasion, they should leave you alone. Second, simplicity in your tax planning. Thirdly, in the event that you want to change the fiduciary in charge of your distributions of income, there is a built in mechanism to do so (Non-grantor trusts). Lastly, it allows you to be punk rock.

A trust is an instrument that has had legal standing within the common law, courts of equity, for hundreds of years.  Additionally, a trust can easily be converted into some of the Bitcoin 2.0 platforms, if they are successful, by having your trustee be an autonomous agent that calculates your taxable income and the code does all the work (looking at you Vitalik).
