
There is No Such Thing as a Bitcoin Legal Expert    


I am extremely reluctant to talk about the current state of the law within the United States, when it comes to Bitcoin and cryptocurrency in general. The reason being, it is truly unsettled. In advance of any potential litigation, civil or criminal, the practice of law is fundamentally about risk analysis. As a lawyer, how can I truly advise a client on the current state of the law when regulations don’t consider the nature of cryptocurrency and there is no case law that give them authoritative weight.


Sure, we have had some regulatory guidance from FinCen for businesses that could be considered money transmitters. Essentially, FinCen is encouraging bitcoin companies to register with FinCen and begin the the expensive and time consuming process of compliance with anti money laundering (AML) and know your customer (KYC) rules (Both should be turned into an altcoin - proof of compliance #yourwelcome).  More recently, we have all grappled with the IRS ruling  designating bitcoin as a commodity and not a currency. On its face both agencies, seem to take a different tack when it comes to their definitions. And without any of my occasional cynicism about federal bureaucracy, I am inclined to believe that they selected these designations quite consistently with their organizational purpose. FinCen exists mainly to thwart money-laundering, which is possible through bitcoin, just as it is the U.S. dollar.  As far as the IRS is concerned, their mission is to extract as much financial flesh from the carcass that is the indentured….just kidding; the voluminous Internal Revenue Code currently favors a lighter tax treatment of equities and commodities as an investment vehicle and their relationship to corporate finance and individual wealth management. Additionally, the tax treatment of traditional currency exchange is so minimal that those who made serious gains would have little tax liability and those with impactful losses would not be able to write them off.


Next we will have to see what the Securities Exchange Commission (SEC) and the Commodities Futures Trade Commision (CFTC) have to say. The SEC regulates the issuance of stocks and other forms of equity (think bitcoin crowdfunding, DAOs), the equity markets (think cryptostock exchanges) and recently the Dodd-Frank Act, gives both the SEC and the CFTC express authority to adopt rules regarding foreign currency exchange markets (FOREX) (think bitcoin and altcoin markets). The possibility of regulatory bootstrapping of Bitcoin financial products alone can be dizzying (60+ pages). What does this mean for application based altcoins and bitcoin 2.0 projects? Are meta-coins or colored coins a “security”? Is Ether a commodity (Ether is the fuel of the cryptoeconomy after all)? Is Cryptsy a “Forex exchange”?


I have been particularly fixated on the JOBS Act that was signed into law in 2012. It essentially delivers “equity crowdfunding” a la Kickstarter while giving investors and equitable stake in a company rather than the gifts, rewards and feelgood swag.  The true gift of the law is allowing a small business to openly solicit funding from non-accredited investors (think 2-5k to throw at a project) without having to having to worship of the altar that venture capital. Over two years later, the SEC hasn’t finalized the rules to move such investments forward. Back to fundraising for bitcoin 2.0 projects, I see a nice parallel between the two. For instance, I wouldn’t have to twist my legal brain into a pretzel to find out if proof-of-burn fundraising that counterparty did was technically legal. It could even put to bed the rumor that Ethereum might seek fundraising in Canada only, because there would be a framework that they could tailor to the presale of Ether.


This brings me back to risk analysis and the law. All statutory law is subject to the motives of politicians and regulatory law the whims of an unaccountable bureaucracy. Bitcoin, and altcoins more so, threaten the ruling establishment on an objective level that is hard to ignore. Currently the hum of cryptocurrency is no more audible than a mosquito in a legislator’s ear, but I can hear the cacophony of blockchain technologies: regional altcoins, metacoin crowdfunding, self-executing contracts, frictionless cross-border trade, and even passive income of low cost mining or sharing your bandwidth to a network.


Quite frankly, I have little energy for risk analysis in crypto. Until the community of entrepreneurs and enthusiasts wake up to the fact that they are participating in crypto-anarchy, swimming upstream with a philosophical purpose, intended or not, and say to yourself “its worth the risk”. Until you go through that metamorphosis, I can’t advise you on whether you should become an S-corp or a 501c3 because at the end of the day you are asking me to marry your quasi-anarchic business practises to a 20th century statutory legal fiction that can be amended at anytime to make your life miserable. Nor will advise you on the best methods of raising capital, bitcoin or otherwise, for your business prior to guidance from the SEC which may not be forthcoming for years. Until then, I will fiddle around with my crypto-trusts for my nieces and nephews and troll bitcoiners and retweet altcoiners (innovation vs. imagination).

Of course there are answers and risk-prevention strategies for all these quandaries, and even applicable caselaw within the pages of dusty old law books.  But I don’t give legal advice for free. . . I work for dogecoin tips.
